# Main Text Figures 1-6 Legends

#### Figure 1. The natural sequence variation in one gene. 
(a) Alignment of all unique amino acid sequences (alleles) of a single gene (an Open Reading Frame, ORF – in this case pdeB) present in the whole genome sequences of up to (see Fig. S2) 2,661 wild-type E. coli strains are used to calculate (b) the wild-type (WT) occurrence of every amino acid residue at every amino acid position across the ORF. (c) ‘Dominant’ (of highest occurrence) and ‘variant’ (non-dominant) amino acids (AAs) and their respective normalized WT occurrences for select amino acid positions are shown on a protein structure. (d) The dominant amino acid residues are used to define the ‘wild-type consensus sequence’ while deviations from this sequence describe the full set of amino acid substitutions in the ORF. (e) A position-independent and normalized view of the WT consensus sequence and amino acid substitutions found in an ORF are used to describe the ‘alleleome’ of a single gene.
 
#### Figure 2. The E. coli alleleome is ‘highly conserved’ and ‘narrow’. 
(a) The individual ORF histogram in Figure 1E can be generated for all genes and combined to show (b) the frequencies of dominant amino acid and amino acid substitutions in all 1.3 million codon positions that make up the ‘Escherichia coli ORF alleleome’. In-frame deletions and insertions are also counted as substitutions, but are rarely observed (see Fig. S3c-d). Conserved regions of the alleleome are defined by positions where the dominant amino acid frequency is at least 90% (c ≥ 90). (c) The sequence diversity at each position is defined by the sum of the amino acid frequencies, c, of the dominant amino acid (D), and any additional variants (+1,+2,+3,…+i) present. By sequentially considering additional variants at each position, the sequence diversity in an increasing number of positions of the alleleome can be fully described (ΣcD+i = 1) (circles). (d) The average sequence diversity captured at positions with at least D+i amino acids is shown. The majority of the D+6 and D+7 codons are found in unstructured regions of the protein. (e) One of the 13 D+7 codons is shown on its protein structure, and is highlighted in red throughout the figure. (f) The total number of positions in the alleleome whose sequence diversity can be fully described (ΣcD+i = 1) by exactly D+i amino acids decreases logarithmically as more variants are considered (circles). The sequence diversity in 99% of the genome can be fully described by a dominant amino acid and ‘narrow’ selection of, at most, two variant amino acids (D+2) (black) (see Fig. S3b). 
 
#### Figure 3. The set of observed alleleomic amino acid substitutions is enriched in low Grantham scores. 
(a) The alleleome is enriched in synonymous mutations and (b) in non-synonymous amino acid substitutions with low Grantham scores. The average amino acid substitution is ‘moderately conservative’. (c) The average Grantham score of all amino acid substitutions originating from the same ‘WT dominant’ amino acid is lower than expected (see Fig. S4) for the majority of amino acids in the alleleome. This value represents the average severity of all mutations stemming from the same amino acid across all positions of the alleleome. 
 

#### Figure 4. Laboratory-acquired mutations can be contextualized against the natural sequence variation of E. coli. 
(a) Mutations are identified in the sequenced genomes of adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) E. coli strains. Non-synonymous mutations resulting in amino acid substitutions i) that are not found (c = 0) or are rarely found (c ≤ 0.01) in the E. coli alleleome (red); ii) that are wild-type variants in the alleleome (0.01 < c < cWT consensus AA) (orange); and iii) that are the WT dominant amino acid (green) are shown. (b) ALE mutations in phosphodiesterase gene, pdeB, are mapped onto the wild-type consensus amino acid sequence. Arrows connecting the amino acids in the starting strain (white circles) to the observed amino acid substitutions in the ALE endpoint (colored circles) show the change in WT occurrence for each mutation. (c) Position-independent normalized WT occurrences (WT frequency) of ALE mutants and natural variants of pdeB (d) are displayed for 8 specific ALE mutations. Arrows indicate the amino acid or codon substitutions at each position (e.g. D42N reflects an aspartate—in the starting strain— to asparagine—in the ALE endpoint—amino acid substitution at position 42). (e) ALE mutations are shown on a rendering of pdeB 3D protein structure using the color scheme in Panel A. WT dominant amino acids (black) and variants (cyan) as well as synonymous mutations (blue) are shown in the starting strain.
 
 
#### Figure 5. Adaptive laboratory evolution mutations explore a novel sequence-space outside that of the E. coli alleleome. 
(a) The wild-type (WT) frequency of amino acids involved in 25,470* unique non-synonymous ALE mutations are (b) rank-ordered by the wild-type frequency of the amino acid in the starting strain (pre-mutation). *In-frame deletions are also counted, but are rarely observed (see Dataset S5A). The amino acid in the starting strain can reflect the WT dominant (black) or a WT variant (cyan) amino acid. The WT frequency of the amino acid substitution is plotted (circles) according to the color scheme in Fig. 4a. ALE mutations in pdeB are shown. An inverse log scale (x-axis) is used to highlight the ALE mutations that are found in wild-type strains. (c) The WT frequency of the pre-mutation amino acid can classify mutations as “leaving the WT consensus” or “leaving a WT variant”.  The WT frequency of the post-mutation amino acid is used to classify an ALE mutation as “novel”, “rare”, “a WT variant”, or “the WT consensus”. The number and fraction of ALE mutants represented by each group is shown. (d) The unexplored natural sequence space is represented by WT variants that exist in the same positions as ALE mutations but that are NOT selected for by ALE (gray triangles). (e-h) The analysis in Panels A-D is replicated using the WT frequency of the codons involved ALE-acquired synonymous mutations. The ALE mutations and associated WT frequencies are provided in Dataset S5A.
 

#### Figure 6. Laboratory evolutions produce more severe mutations than found in wild-type strains.
(a) All distinct mutations (AAoriginal→AAfinal) found in ALE and (b) LTEE strains are rank-ordered by prevalence and colored by their calculated Grantham scores (Dataset S6). The cumulative average Grantham score (black) is calculated only for non-synonymous mutations and is greater than that of wild-type mutations. (c) The histogram shows the normalized occurrence of 25,309 and 7,753 non-synonymous mutations with varying Grantham scores in ALE and (d) LTEE strains, respectively. Wild-type occurrences are shown (gray). The cumulative fraction of mutations with predictably benign, moderate and severe impacts on protein properties is shown. We show that the observed distribution of Grantham scores in the WT and laboratory strains is distinct (p < 0.01, Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sample test, Fig. S8, Dataset S7). (e) The normalized occurrence of mutations with the same starting amino acid are shown (histogram) for wild-type, ALE, and LTEE strains. We show that the observed rates of specific mutations in WT and laboratory strains are distinct for a majority of non-synonymous amino acid substitutions (p < 0.01, chi-squared test, Fig. S9-10, Dataset S7). The average Grantham score for mutations stemming from the same amino acid was calculated. (f) The non-synonymous amino acid substitutions observed in ALE and (g) in LTEE strains are more severe than those observed in the wild-type sequence variation for a majority of starting codons and amino acids.
